Add lfc shrinkage and volcano plots (#405)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: RNA-seq/05-nb_cell_line_DESeq2.Rmd

In this notebook, we'll perform an analysis to identify the genes that are differentially expressed in _MYCN_ amplified vs. nonamplified neuroblastoma cell lines. 

These RNA-seq data are from [Harenza, _et al._ (2017)](https://doi.org/10.1038/sdata.2017.33).

More information about DESeq2 can be found in the [excellent vignette](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html) from Love, Anders, and Huber from which this is adapted (see also: [Love, _et al._ (2014)](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8)).

> DESeq2 takes unnormalized counts or estimated counts and does the following:

Reviewer: This is a comment for 2018 Jaclyn as much as it is for you, but we since we're here and I expect you will be instructing for this material based on earlier conversations...

How much detail to go into here is always an area of uncertainty for me. It's good to mention the three steps, I think. Of them, I feel like the size factors bit might be the most important to talk about because it highlights some issues with RNA-seq data (e.g., library size and composition). On the other hand, we very well may not do it justice in this format and are better off linking to the HBC course that is intended to spend much more instruction time on DGE analysis. I don't know what the "right" answer is.

Reviewer: Works for me 👍

First, let's read in the data we processed with `tximeta`.

#### Preparation

```{r read_rds, live = TRUE}
# Read in the RDS file we created in the last notebook
gene_summarized <- readr::read_rds(txi_file)
```

We're most interested in _MYCN_ amplification, which we had stored in the `status` column of the sample metadata of `gene_summarized`.
While the sample metadata is stored internally in the `colData` slot, the `SummarizedExperiment` object makes it easy for us to access it as if it were just a column of a data frame, using the familiar `$` syntax.

```{r Status, live = TRUE}
gene_summarized$status
```

This is stored as a `character` type, but to give a bit more information to `DESeq`, we will convert this to a `factor`.

```{r status_factor, live = TRUE}
gene_summarized$status <- as.factor(gene_summarized$status)
```

We'll want to use the "Nonamplified" samples as our _reference_.
Let's look at the `levels` of `status`.

```{r levels}
levels(gene_summarized$status)
```

We can see that these are in alphabetical order, so "Amplified" samples would be the reference. 

> We can use the `relevel` function to remedy this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can use the `relevel()` function to remedy this.
```

```{r relevel}
gene_summarized$status <- relevel(gene_summarized$status, ref = "Nonamplified")
```

```{r check-levels, live = TRUE}
# Check what the levels are now
levels(gene_summarized$status)
```

#### DESeq Dataset creation

```{r ddset, live = TRUE}

> # Create a DESeq2 dataset from gene_summarized 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Create a DESeq2 dataset from `gene_summarized` 
```

# remember that `status` is the variable of interest here
ddset <- DESeqDataSet(gene_summarized,
                      design = ~ status)
```

### Differential expression

#### Filtering low-expressed genes

> Genes that have very low counts are not likely be differentially expressed, so we will do some light [pre-filtering](http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html#pre-filtering). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Genes that have very low counts are not likely to yield reliable differential expression results, so we will do some light [pre-filtering](http://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html#pre-filtering). 
```

We will keep only genes with total counts of at least 10 across all samples.

```{r filter_ddset}
genes_to_keep <- rowSums(counts(ddset)) >= 10
ddset <- ddset[genes_to_keep, ]
```

#### Differential expression analysis

> We'll now use the wrapper function `DESeq` to perform our differential expression analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We'll now use the wrapper function `DESeq()` to perform our differential expression analysis.
```

> As mentioned earlier, this performs a number of steps, including an [outlier removal procedure](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/vignettes/DESeq2/inst/doc/DESeq2.html#approach-to-count-outliers). 

Reviewer: Good add!

> For this particular data set, there is a pretty large number of outliers, which can be a bit of a red flag, but we will proceed for now.

Reviewer 2: dataset or data set?

readr::write_rds(deseq_object, file = deseq_file)
```

Now we will have a look at the results table.

```{r deseq_results}
deseq_results <- results(deseq_object)
deseq_results
```

How many genes were differentially expressed (FDR < 0.05)?

```{r results_summary}
summary(deseq_results, alpha = 0.05)
```

#### Shrinking log2 fold change estimates

The estimates of log2 fold change calculated by `DESeq()` are not corrected for expression level.
This means that when counts are small, we are likely to end up with some large fold change values that overestimate the true extent of the change between conditions.

> We can correct this by applying a "shrinkage" procedure, which will adjust large values with small counts downward, while preserving values where we have larger counts, which are likely to be more accurate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can correct this by applying a "shrinkage" procedure, which will adjust large values with small counts downward, while preserving values with larger counts, which are likely to be more accurate.
```

> To do this, we will use the `lfcShrink()` function, but first we need to know the name and/or position of the "coefficient" that was calculated by `DESeq()`, which we can do with the `resultsNames()` function

Reviewer: This seems like the right level of detail to me 👍

```{r deseq_coef}
# get the deseq coefficient names:
resultsNames(deseq_object)
```

> The figure we are interested in is the status measure, which is in position 2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We are interested in the `status` measure, which is in position 2.
```
or maybe repeat the word "coefficient"

There are a few options for the shrinkage estimation. 

> The default is `apeglm` ([Zhu _et al._ 2018](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty895)), but we have found that this can be sensitive to extreme outliers, which are definitely a factor in this data set.

Reviewer: Should this be the following under your preferred guidelines?

```suggestion
The default is `apeglm` ([Zhu _et al._ (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty895)), but we have found that this can be sensitive to extreme outliers, which are definitely a factor in this data set.
```

If _not_, the way the current guidelines are written have confused me.

Reviewer: Is my suggestion correct?

Author: Not in this case... I want the final text to read: 
> The default is `apeglm` ([Zhu _et al._ 2018](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty895))

not 

> The default is `apeglm` ([Zhu _et al._ (2018)](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty895))

which would be too many parens.

Reviewer: Diffs are hard.

> The default is `apeglm` ([Zhu _et al._ 2018](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bty895)), but we have found that this can be sensitive to extreme outliers, which are definitely a factor in this data set.

Reviewer 2: Do we want to generally encourage them to still try `apeglm` first?

Author: I am agnostic to this question, which I why I didn't address it directly. Obviously the authors think you should use `apeglm` and it is "more principled" in some ways (it is specifically designed for expression count data, where `ashr` is much more general) but I don't feel like I really have enough of a sense to make a definitive recommendation. We have both installed, so people can try them and see what happens if it pleases them. We might ask them to do that in the exercises?

> So for this data set we will be using `ashr` ([Stephens 2017](https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/kxw041)) 

Reviewer: Same comment about parentheses around the year.

```{r lfc_shrink}
# calculate shrunken log2 fold change estimates
deseq_shrunken <- lfcShrink(deseq_object,
                            # the coefficient we want to reestimate
                            coef = 2, 
                            # We will use `ashr` for estimation
                            type = "ashr"
                            )
```

> Let's compare the log2 fold change estimates from from the two results tables:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's compare the log2 fold change estimates from the two results tables by creating a plot. 
```

> Let's compare the log2 fold change estimates from from the two results tables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's compare the log2 fold change estimates from from the two results tables.
```

First we will combine the results into a new data frame.

```{r compare_shrink}
comparison_df <- data.frame(
  lfc_original = deseq_results$log2FoldChange,
  lfc_shrunken = deseq_shrunken$log2FoldChange,
  logmean = log10(deseq_results$baseMean)
  )
```

Now we can plot the original and shrunken log2 fold change values to see what happened after shrinkage.

```{r plot_comparison}
ggplot(comparison_df, 
       aes(x = lfc_original, 
           y = lfc_shrunken, 
           color = logmean)) +
  geom_point(alpha = 0.1) +
  theme_bw() +
  scale_color_viridis_c() + 
  coord_cartesian(xlim = c(-10,10), ylim = c(-10,10)) # zoom in on the middle
```

> We will now do a bit of manipulation to store the results in a data frame for easier manipulation.

Reviewer 2: Manipulation for easier manipulation? 😄

Author: Ugh. That needs a fix.
```suggestion
We will now do a bit of manipulation to store the results in a data frame and add the gene symbols.
```

```{r results_dataframe}
# this is of class DESeqResults -- we want a data frame
deseq_df <- deseq_shrunken %>%
  # convert to a data frame
  as.data.frame() %>%
  # the gene ids were stored as row names -- let's them a column for easy display
  tibble::rownames_to_column(var = "gene_id") %>%

>   # add on the gene names from the original deseq object
>   dplyr::mutate(gene_name = rowData(deseq_object)$gene_name)

Author: ```suggestion
  # add on the gene symbols from the original deseq object
  dplyr::mutate(gene_symbol = rowData(deseq_object)$gene_name)
```

```

Let's print out the results table, sorted by log2 fold change. 

> The highest values should be genes more expressed in the MYCN amplified cell lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The highest values should be genes more expressed in the _MYCN_ amplified cell lines.
```

> ```{r sorted_table, live = TRUE}

Reviewer: I think the answer to this is going to be no, but I will go ahead and ask anyway. Do we have control of the column name `gene_name`? Ideally that would say `gene_symbol` instead.

Author: Of course we do, we made it! I mean, we added it from the tximeta data, were it was called gene_name, but we don't have to keep that in _our_ data frame. Will fix.

Reviewer: One word of caution though: folks will need to create the `SummarizedExperiment` themselves during a guided exercise, so could be a point of friction.

Author: The change I made for this is at:

https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/blob/0d549abbaad60b3954bbc94be1ddc59be5efdc1e/RNA-seq/05-nb_cell_line_DESeq2.Rmd#L251

So the SummarizedExperiment is unchanged, just the column name when we add it into our results data frame. I don't think that is too bad?

Reviewer: Sounds good 👍

# Print the table sorted by log2FoldChange 
deseq_df %>% 
  dplyr::arrange(dplyr::desc(log2FoldChange))
```

> Now let's write the full results table to a file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Now let's write the full results table to a file.
```

```{r write_tsv}
readr::write_tsv(deseq_df, file = deseq_df_file)
```

#### Volcano Plot 

With these shrunken effect sizes, we will draw a volcano plot, using the [`EnhancedVolcano` package](https://github.com/kevinblighe/EnhancedVolcano) to make it a bit easier.

> `EnhancedVolcano` has many, many options, which is a good thing if you don't like all of it's default settings.

Reviewer: Are the defaults reasonable for most of our participants' use cases? (I think the answer is yes based on my little bit of knowledge of `EnhancedVolcano` but we may want to say so.)

Author: Which specific things do you think might be worth mentioning? I was thinking about maybe highlighting the cutoff values, but did you have other things in mind?

Reviewer: > I was thinking about maybe highlighting the cutoff values, but did you have other things in mind?

I was thinking about the cutoffs as well.

Author: I added some detail, as well as comments about the options we use, in https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/training-modules/pull/405/commits/40c459b76fdc212083b8bed2363f0164c9b24b60
